Guidelines for assessment and instruction in statistics education

GAISE 2005

College Report

Recommendations: 
1. Emphasize statistical literacy and develop statistical thinking
2. Use real data
3. Stress conceptual understanding, rather than mere knowledge of procedures
4. Foster active learning in the classroom
5. Use technology for developing conceptual understanding and analyzing data
6. Use assessments to improve and evaluate student learning 

Stat Thinking:
 need data
 getting good data is hard
 variability is everywhere
 we can quantify and describe variability

Active Learning

Understand:
* Data beat anecdotes
* Variability is natural, predictable, and quantifiable
* Random sampling allows results of surveys and experiments
  to be extended to the population from which the sample was
  taken
* Random assignment in comparative experiments allows cause-
  and-effect conclusions to be drawn
* Association is not causation
* Statistical significance does not necessarily imply practical
  importance, especially for studies with large sample sizes.
* Finding no statistically significant difference or relationship
  does not necessarily mean there is no difference or no relationship 
  in the population, especially for studies with small sample
  sizes

Recognize:

* Common sources of bias in surveys and experiments
* How to determine the population to which the results of statistical
  inference can be extended, if any, based on how the data were collected
* How to determine when a cause-and-effect inference can be
  drawn from an association based on how the data were collected 
  (e.g., the design of the study)
* That words such as “normal," “random,” and “correlation” have 
  specific meanings in statistics that may differ from common usage

Understand Process:
* How to obtain or generate data
* How to graph the data as a first step in analyzing data, and
  how to know when that’s enough to answer the question of
  interest
* How to interpret numerical summaries and graphical displays
  of data—both to answer questions and to check conditions (to
  use statistical procedures correctly)
* How to make appropriate use of statistical inference
* How to communicate the results of a statistical analysis

Basic ideas:
* The concept of a sampling distribution and how it applies to
  making statistical inferences based on samples of data (including
  the idea of standard error)
* The concept of statistical significance, including significance
  levels and p-values
* The concept of confidence interval, including the interpretation
  of confidence level and margin of error

Skills:
* How to interpret statistical results in context
* How to critique news stories and journal articles that include
  statistical information, including identifying what’s missing in
  the presentation and the flaws in the studies or methods used
  to generate the information
* When to call for help from a statistician

SUGGESTIONS FOR TEACHERS:
✓ Model statistical thinking for students, working examples and
explaining the questions and processes involved in solving
statistical problems from conception to conclusion.
✓ Use technology and show students how to use technology
effectively to manage data, explore data, perform inference,
and check conditions that underlie inference procedures.
✓ Give students practice developing and using statistical think-
ing. This should include open-ended problems and projects.
✓ Give students plenty of practice with choosing appropriate
questions and techniques, rather than telling them which tech-
nique to use and merely having them implement it.
✓ Assess and give feedback on students’ statistical thinking.

Use activities -- finish in the same period.

Provide feedback.

Tech tools:
* Ease of data entry, ability to import data in multiple formats
* Interactive capabilities
* Dynamic linking between data, graphical, and numerical analyses
* Ease of use for particular audiences
* Availability to students, portability

Assessment:
✓ Integrate assessment as an essential component of the course.
  Assessment tasks that are well-coordinated with what the
  teacher is doing in class are more effective than tasks that focus
  on what happened in class two weeks earlier.
✓ Use a variety of assessment methods to provide a more complete 
   evaluation of student learning.
✓ Assess statistical literacy using assessments such as interpreting 
   or critiquing articles in the news and graphs in media.
✓ Assess statistical thinking using assessments such as student
   projects and open-ended investigative tasks.


Assessment items to avoid using on tests: 
  True/False, 
  pure computation without a context or interpretation, 
  items with too much data to enter and compute or analyze, 
  items that only test memorization of definitions or formulas

Rank advice from best to worst and explain why.
(is a p-value from a test of mu1=mu2 better than a 95% CI?)

Critique a causation = correlation claim from the news.

For each of the following three settings, state the type of analysis you
would conduct (e.g., one-sample t-test, regression, chi-square test of
independence, chi-square goodness-of-fit test, etc.) if you had all the
raw data and specify the roles of the variable(s) on which you would
perform the analysis, but do not actually carry out the analysis.

fiber vs cereal cost per oz (regression)

which pairs of variables should be plotted as a scatterplot?
1. Blood pressure and age
2. Region of country and opinion about stronger gun control laws
3. Verbal SAT and math SAT score
4. Handspan and gender (male or female)

